[serve] haproxy ingress request router metrics (#63356)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/monitoring.md

| `ray_serve_proxy_status` | Gauge | `node_id`, `node_ip_address` | Current status of the proxy as a numeric value: `1` = STARTING, `2` = HEALTHY, `3` = UNHEALTHY, `4` = DRAINING, `5` = DRAINED. |
| `ray_serve_proxy_shutdown_duration_ms` | Histogram | `node_id`, `node_ip_address` | Time taken for a proxy to shut down in milliseconds. |

### HAProxy ingress request router metrics

These metrics observe the **ingress request router** data path used by Serve's HAProxy proxy when a deployment opts in (e.g. the LLM ingress with `LLMRouter`). For each request that reaches a router-bearing app, HAProxy calls the router's `/internal/route` endpoint to pick a replica before forwarding traffic to it. The metrics below cover that consultation.

To enable the feature, set `RAY_SERVE_INGRESS_REQUEST_ROUTER_METRICS_ENABLED=1`. The socket path defaults to `/tmp/haproxy-serve/<node_id>/metrics.sock` and can be overridden with `RAY_SERVE_HAPROXY_METRICS_SOCKET_PATH`.

| Metric | Type | Tags | Description |
|--------|------|------|-------------|

> | `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_latency_ms` | Histogram | `application` | Wall-clock time HAProxy spent consulting the ingress request router (measured around the Lua socket call) for **successful** consultations only. Buckets cover 0.5 ms to 1 s. Use to detect router-side slowdowns before they show up in end-to-end p99. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_duration_seconds` | Histogram | `application` | Wall-clock time HAProxy spent consulting the ingress request router (measured around the Lua socket call) for **successful** consultations only. Buckets cover 0.5 ms to 1 s. Use to detect router-side slowdowns before they show up in end-to-end p99. |
```

Reviewer: Could we also include failures in this histogram with the option to split by `outcome="success|failure"`?

Author: I think the `latency_ms` suffix fits better with the naming convention of other metrics, but I can apply the suggestion if you feel strongly about it.

Reviewer: Nah not blocking. The `_seconds` part is the most relevant best practice https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/

Author: <img width="1493" height="431" alt="Screenshot 2026-05-19 at 9 57 28 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16d93f45-ba03-4cdf-ba19-e0cdc19d3cda" />
latency by outcome

```
histogram_quantile(0.9, sum(rate(ray_serve_haproxy_ingress_router_latency_ms_bucket{route=~".*",route!~"/-/.*",application=~".*",deployment=~".*",replica=~".*",ray_io_cluster=~".*",ClusterId=~"ses_fpdiazhqrzpeakwf1aw4zmrdrs", outcome=~".+"}[5m])) by (application, outcome, le))
```

> | `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_truncations` | Counter | `application` | Number of requests whose body was clipped by HAProxy's `tune.bufsize` before being forwarded to the router. The router still gets a prefix plus an `X-Body-Truncated: <have>/<full>` header. Non-zero values indicate a body-aware policy may be missing context; consider raising `RAY_SERVE_HAPROXY_INGRESS_REQUEST_ROUTER_BUFSIZE`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_truncations_total` | Counter | `application` | Number of requests whose body was clipped by HAProxy's `tune.bufsize` before being forwarded to the router. The router still gets a prefix plus an `X-Body-Truncated: <have>/<full>` header. Non-zero values indicate a body-aware policy may be missing context; consider raising `RAY_SERVE_HAPROXY_INGRESS_REQUEST_ROUTER_BUFSIZE`. |
```

> | `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_server_mismatch` | Counter | `application` | Number of requests where HAProxy ultimately routed to a different replica than the router returned. This happens when the named replica is `DOWN` and `option redispatch` falls through to load balancing. Non-zero values indicate the router's view of replica health is stale, or replicas are flapping. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_server_mismatches_total` | Counter | `application` | Number of requests where HAProxy ultimately routed to a different replica than the router returned. This happens when the named replica is `DOWN` and `option redispatch` falls through to load balancing. Non-zero values indicate the router's view of replica health is stale, or replicas are flapping. |
```

> | `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_failures` | Counter | `application`, `reason` | Number of router consultations that failed to pin a replica. Each failure causes HAProxy to return `503` to the client. The `reason` tag is one of `router_unreachable` (socket connect/send/recv failed), `router_non_200` (router returned a non-200 status), `unparseable_replica_id` (router 200 but body didn't contain a string `replica_id`), or `unknown_replica_id` (router returned a `replica_id` not in HAProxy's current replica map). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `serve_haproxy_ingress_router_failures_total` | Counter | `application`, `reason` | Number of router consultations that failed to pin a replica. Each failure causes HAProxy to return `503` to the client. The `reason` tag is one of `router_unreachable` (socket connect/send/recv failed), `router_non_200` (router returned a non-200 status), `unparseable_replica_id` (router 200 but body didn't contain a string `replica_id`), or `unknown_replica_id` (router returned a `replica_id` not in HAProxy's current replica map). |
```
